Unit: Python Environment Setup (Week 1, Day 1)

Setting up your development environment is the foundation of everything in this bootcamp. Having the right tools configured correctly from the start saves time and prevents errors. This lesson is a reference guide to return to whenever starting a new project.

Learning Goals: install and configure VSCode; create and configure a GitHub account; link GitHub to VSCode; install the Conda package manager; create and manage Conda environments; open Jupyter notebooks in VSCode; configure Git and commit changes via VSCode.

VSCode: Visual Studio Code is a free, powerful code editor with strong support for Python, Jupyter notebooks, and Git. Download it from code.visualstudio.com and verify it opens.

GitHub: like Google Drive but for code, with full version history. Essential for version control, collaboration, and showcasing your work. Create a free account at github.com, verify your email, and complete your profile.

Linking GitHub to VSCode: install the official GitHub extension in VSCode, then sign in via the Accounts icon.

Configure Git (critical step): without setting your global username and email, you cannot commit changes or send work to Ironhack. In the VSCode terminal run:
  git config --global user.name "Your Name"
  git config --global user.email "your.email@example.com"
Then verify with the same commands (no value). Create an empty GitHub repository (do NOT initialize with a README, .gitignore, or license).

Git basics: stage (git add) marks changes to save; commit (git commit) saves staged changes with a message; pull (git pull) gets the latest from GitHub; push (git push) sends your commits to GitHub.

Conda environments: isolate each project in its own environment so dependencies stay separate and reproducible. Different projects may need different versions of the same package; installing everything globally causes conflicts. Install Miniconda (lighter) or Anaconda, check "Add to PATH" during install, and verify with `conda --version`. Create an environment via VSCode's Command Palette (Python: Select Interpreter -> Create Environment -> Conda -> choose Python 3.11 -> name it, e.g. bootcamp-env), then select it as the active interpreter (shown bottom-right).

Jupyter notebooks in VSCode: interactive documents combining code, output, and markdown. Install the Jupyter extension, open or create a .ipynb file, and CRITICALLY select the correct Conda environment as the kernel (top-right). Verify with a cell: print("Hello, World!").

Git workflow in VSCode: Initialize Repository (Source Control panel), Add Remote (origin -> your GitHub repo URL), stage changes (+), commit with a message (Ctrl/Cmd+Enter), then Push.

Summary: VSCode is your primary editor; GitHub is essential for version control; always configure Git username/email before committing; Conda environments keep projects isolated; always verify the correct environment/kernel when opening notebooks. Bookmark this lesson as a reference.
